---
title: "Generative AI Outlook Report"
collection: publications
category: reports
permalink: /publications/genai-jrc
excerpt: ''
date: 2025-06-13
paperurl: 'https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/handle/JRC142598?'
citation: 'ABENDROTH DIAS, K., ARIAS CABARCOS, P., BACCO, F.M., BASSANI, E., BERTOLETTI, A. et al., Generative AI Outlook Report - Exploring the Intersection of Technology, Society and Policy, NAVAJAS CAWOOD, E., VESPE, M., KOTSEV, A. and VAN BAVEL, R. (editors), Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg, 2025, https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2760/1109679, JRC142598.'
---

This Outlook report, prepared by the European Commission’s Joint Research Centre (JRC), examines the transformative role of Generative AI (GenAI) with a specific emphasis on the European Union. It highlights the potential of GenAI for innovation, productivity, and societal change. GenAI is a disruptive technology due to its capability of producing human-like content at an unprecedented scale. As such, it holds multiple opportunities for advancements across various sectors, including healthcare, education, science, and creative industries. At the same time, GenAI also presents significant challenges, including the possibility to amplify misinformation, bias, labour disruption, and privacy concerns. All those issues are cross-cutting and therefore, the rapid development of GenAI requires a multidisciplinary approach to fully understand its implications. Against this context, the Outlook report begins with an overview of the technological aspects of GenAI, detailing their current capabilities and outlining emerging trends. It then focuses on economic implications, examining how GenAI can transform industry dynamics and necessitate adaptation of skills and strategies. The societal impact of GenAI is also addressed, with focus on both the opportunities for inclusivity and the risks of bias and over-reliance. Considering these challenges, the regulatory framework section outlines the EU’s current legislative framework, such as the AI Act and horizontal Data legislation to promote trustworthy and transparent AI practices. Finally, sector-specific ‘deep dives’ examine the opportunities and challenges that GenAI presents. This section underscores the need for careful management and strategic policy interventions to maximize its potential benefits while mitigating the risks. The report concludes that GenAI has the potential to bring significant social and economic impact in the EU, and that a comprehensive and nuanced policy approach is needed to navigate the challenges and opportunities while ensuring that technological developments are fully aligned with democratic values and EU legal framework.
